Cryptology, the science of secure communications, is as old as civilization and the written word. Throughout the ages, everyone from kings to shopkeepers has employed codes to gain a competitive edge, reduce vulnerability, hide their true intentions or revel in the comfort of knowing something that someone else doesn't.
Just as communications evolved from scratches on bark sheathes to streaming bits of electrons over optical fibers, cryptology has matured from simple letter-replacement schemes to complex mathematical algorithms. But cryptology's evolution wasn't sparked by ideas for better secret keeping, but rather to meet the challenge of an adversary's ability to break existing codes.
The first recorded use of cryptography was by the Spartans, around 400 B.C. The warring Greek city-state used a "scytale", a wooden baton wrapped with a parchment, to encode military and government messages. Wrapping the parchment around the scytale would reveal the correct text. To anyone without a corresponding scytale, the message would be nothing more than an incomprehensible set of characters.
The cryptology of the Roman Empire was far more simplistic than the Spartan method. Around 100 B.C., Emperor Julius Caesar employed an uncomplicated technique of shifting letters of messages. By today's standards, the Roman system was no more effective than a schoolyard brainteaser. However, the method worked well since most of Rome's adversaries couldn't read, much less decipher a coded message.
Cryptology took on many forms in the centuries between the fall of Rome and the dawn of the Industrial Age. By the late 19th century, with the advent of the telegraph and wireless radio, cryptology took its permanent place as an important component of commercial, military and diplomatic communications. Rudimentary mechanical and electromechanical encoding inventions developed at the turn of the 20th century and through World War I laid the foundation for stronger and more efficient cipher devices.
Enigma, Nazi Germany's famed encryption device of World War II, was the first master of the new mechanical techniques. An engineering marvel, Enigma was essentially a typewriter that used a series of three or four preset rotors (depending on the model) to substitute the letters of a message. So complex and efficient was Enigma that the British made cracking the encryption method a top priority. A team of Polish cryptographers unraveled the mystery of how Enigma worked, but it took the concerted effort of the famed British and American code breakers at Bletchley Park to break the code. Historians credit the defeat of Enigma with shortening the war by two years.
With the dawn of the computer age, the possibilities for encryption methods and devices expanded exponentially. Machines with blazing fast computing power gave cryptographers the ability for the first time to design complicated encryption techniques.
The most well-known and successful automation endeavor was Lucifer, an IBM project that introduced complex mathematical equations and functions to encrypt messages. Lucifer was later adopted by the National Security Agency (NSA), which modified it to come up with the first data encryption standard (DES). DES paved the way for public-key technology, the International Data Encryption Algorithm (IDEA), Pretty Good Privacy (PGP), TripleDES, RSA and more.
The next great evolution in cryptology came with the introduction of microprocessor-powered computers. The rapid deployment of increasingly powerful desktops quickened the pace of cryptographic development, since even a moderately skilled computer user could break many of the algorithms in use. Greater threats from previously unlikely quarters gave birth to new encryption methods, including the Rijndael algorithm and Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC).
Just as academic and commercial cryptologists are playing with numbers and equations to devise better encryption methods, so too are curious and motivated hackers. Cyberspace outlaws and foreign adversaries are feverishly working to unlock our military and economic secrets. As the bad guys get smarter and more resourceful, the good guys must improve their cryptology efforts.
Cryptology is more deeply rooted in every part of our communication and computing world than when it was first employed by ancient peoples. We use it to protect everything from e-mail to e-commerce transactions to personal diaries. As our dependency upon technology increases, so too will our dependency upon cryptography. After all, we all have things we want to keep secret.
Ciphers. Ease of use makes ciphers popular. There are two general types of ciphers. Substitution ciphers require a cipher alphabet to replace plaintext with other letters or symbols. Transposition ciphers use the shuffling of letters in a word to make the word incomprehensible.
Ciphers are the secret codes used to encrypt plaintext messages. Ciphers of various types have been devised, but all of them are either substitution or transposition ciphers. Computer ciphers are ciphers that are used for digital messages. Computer ciphers differ from ordinary substitution and transposition ciphers in that a computer application performs the encryption of data. The term cryptography is sometimes restricted to the use of ciphers or to methods involving the substitution of other letters or symbols for the original letters of a message.
Substitution Ciphers. In simple substitution ciphers, a particular letter or symbol is substituted for each letter. The letters are substituted in their normal order, usually with normal word divisions. Such ciphers are recognized by the occurrence of a set of normal letter frequencies attached to the wrong letters. They are solved by using frequency analysis and by noting the characteristics of particular letters, such as the tendency to form doubles, common word prefixes and suffixes, common first and last letters in words, and common combinations, such as qu, th, er, and re.
 A substitution cipher is performed by reordering the letters in the alphabet. For example, a cipher devised long ago by Julius Caesar shifts all the letters in the alphabet by three places. Thus, when the v letter a is needed, a d is used, and when a b is to be written, an e is used. The letters wrap around at the end of the alphabet. So, if a person wants to encipher a z, it is written as a c. Similarly, a y is written as a b. The entire cipher is represented by two rows of letters. These rows are called a lookup table. 
When someone wants to encrypt a word, he or she looks up the original letter in the top row and uses the corresponding ciphertext letter in the bottom row. So, for example, the word HELLO would be written as KHOOR. To decrypt the coded word, a person would search for the letter in the bottom row and write down the corresponding letter in the top row. So, KHOOR decrypts back to HELLO. While the above substitution cipher is easy to remember, it is also easy to break. To make a substitution cipher more complex, multiple substitutions and sometimes even numbers are added to the cipher.
In multiple-substitution (polyalphabetic) ciphers, a keyword or number is employed. The first message letter might be enciphered by adding to it the numerical value of the first letter of the keyword; the second message letter is enciphered similarly, using the second letter of the keyword, and so on, repeating the keyword as often as necessary to encipher the whole message. When adding the numerical value of a keyword letter to a message letter, one starts counting with the message letter. Thus, to encipher the word TODAY by the code word DIG, t becomes w, as d is the fourth letter of the alphabet (count t, u, v, w); o becomes w, as i is the ninth letter of the alphabet; and d becomes j, as g is the seventh letter of the alphabet. For the rest of the message the code word is repeated, and thus TODAY is coded WWJDG.
By using, combinations of the basic types of ciphers, ciphers can be created to various degrees of complexity. The key, however, should be easy to remember or reproduce, for without it the cipher is no longer a message but a puzzle. Given sufficient time and material, most ciphers can be solved and their keys discovered, but for a particular purpose the complexity need be only so great as to obtain the level of security desired. Military orders that must be kept secret for only a few hours, for example, can be encrypted in a cipher that would be entirely unsuited for diplomatic reports using a cipher over an extended period of time.
Transposition Cipher. In a transposition cipher, the order of plaintext letters is changed to derive the ciphertext. The message is usually written without word divisions in rows of letters arranged in a rectangular block. The letters are then transposed in a prearranged order, such as by vertical columns, diagonals, or spirals, or by more complicated systems, such as the knight's tour, which is based on the move of the knight in chess. The arrangement of the letters in the enciphered message depends upon the size of the block of code words used and upon the route followed in inscribing and transposing the letters.
A cipher in which every pair of letters is swapped is an example of a transposition cipher. In this case, for example, the ciphertext for elephant would be lepeahtn. The first and second letters are swapped, then the third and fourth letters are swapped, and so on. Transposition ciphers may be combined with substitution ciphers to produce a more complex encoded message.
Although privacy and security goals may at times seem at odds, successful e-businesses ensure that privacy and security initiatives are clearly explained, well understood, and complementary.
Privacy, with a capital "P", is moving to the top of the public agenda. You only need to look at legislative activity in the United States, United Kingdom, or any other country with high rates of Internet usage, or count the number of newspaper headlines and magazine cover stories, to see that privacy is a hot issue. It's a public debate that's likely to last for some time, with serious implications for businesses, especially for those that rely heavily on information systems and Internet technology.
Progress in any debate proceeds from consensus on basic definitions, so let's be clear about how we use the word "privacy." Much of the current debate over privacy concerns a subset of privacy in general, namely electronic or data privacy. In turn, many discussions about data privacy raise the issue of security, which often means information security, and a subset thereof, computer security. Unfortunately, confusion between data privacy and computer security can hinder a company's attempts to achieve excellence in either area.
In the context of data privacy, privacy refers to a value. To differing degrees, in different cultures, privacy is a right as well as a value. However, in the context of computer security, the term security doesn't refer to a value, but rather a methodology and a technology. As such, security is neutral; it can serve privacy or hinder it.
For example, a company may feel the need to filter outgoing e-mail to prevent company bank account details from being sent to a competitor, but that implies reading employees' e-mail, which some people consider to be an invasion of privacy.
Or consider a security technology such as biometrics, which can prevent unauthorized people from accessing your data. It can also be used to track people's activity without their consent, which might be considered an invasion of privacy on the one hand, or a boost to security on the other.
One example is Super Bowl XXXV where the faces of people entering the stadium were scanned with software that looked for matches with the faces of known criminals. Possible matches were sent to a police control room. While an improvement in the apprehension rate for known criminals would seem to be a goal shared by all members of society, some people objected to this activity because it was done without the knowledge or consent of the people being scanned. Of course, the existence of such knowledge or consent would have changed the security function of the system from detection to deterrence.
Bottom Line: Clearly, security and privacy are different. Of course, when considered in a broad sense, security can be a value. When we process valuable data with computers, we talk about keeping it secure. Computer security is typically defined as protecting the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of data and the systems that process it. But this definition contains a number of assumptions that transform security from a human value into a technical objective.
For example, ownership of data and the right of the owner to restrict access to that data is implied. But data ownership is a central issue in the electronic privacy debate. Do you own any data about yourself? Do you have the right to restrict the use of that data? Do others have the right to demand data from you in certain circumstances, such as purchase and delivery of services?
While computer security can enable restrictions on the use of data, and control access to data based on assigned rights to access that data, it can't decide the issue of legal ownership. The right of an entity to impose restrictions on the use of data isn't a question to which either the theory or practice of computer security can supply an answer. 
